---
layout: post
title: "Money: The Original Lean Solution"
date: 2021-06-11
description: "What has money got to do with lean thinking and what does it mean in the modern world?"
tags:
- Human Systems
- Lean Thinking
comments: true
---

It struck me about a year ago that I did not understand money. Not in the sense that I didn't know the worth of money in the way a spoilt Billionaire's sprog doesn't; though I've never been short of cash, I know what it's like to submit one's labour for a wage packet. The thing I—and a lot of my knowledgeable friends—didn't understand was where money comes from. This post is a summary of the amazing emergent system we call the economy (somewhat simplified as i don't have an econ degree) and what it can tell us about things like bitcoin, the concept of a state and capitalism.

<!-- more -->

The origin story that I was told and had assumed about money was what some refer to as the *Robinson Crusoe* story for money. It goes something like this: Once upon a time, people used to trade by barter. Ug the cowherd would go to Og the turnip grower and barter a half pint of milk for a turnip. Unfortunately for Og, turnips are seasonal @@

As simple a story as this is, its pretty easy to poke holes in. Firstly, there's no reason why any nation of people would settle on one thing for the currency. Why gold? Why not Silver or Rubies? Secondly, there is no @@

Instead, lets revise our origin story for money with a problem that actually existed and needed solving. For that, we need to go back five millenia to the first city states. What we now call civilisation began out of necessity. The peoples of the middle east (the same has occured in other places such as the indus valley, the Andes and Modern Mexico) were happy living a bountiful hunter gatherer existence when climate change occured, meaning they had to begin farming. This period of time was marked with famines that meant that the early farmers would create a surplus of grain to store in granaries that would keep them alive during lean years. Calculating the amount of grain needed to survive the lean years led to the specialisation of some people into accountants. These granaries were also targets for starving tribes and other groups during famines and so city walls, soldiers and weaponsmiths developed to defend the grain. It is at this point that we start to see hierarchy develop in human society. Military leaders become kings who use their armies to tax grain from surrounding towns and villages, not just to store for famine, but to feed a growing army, bureacracy and to trade for exotic resources from other city states. The new army can also be used to force other city states to submit and pay tribute.

This system of early society has a problem though. When the army stays in a village on their way to defend the kingdom from invaders (or pillage other territory), they deplete that village of resources. This could be solved by supply trains following the army from the capital but this is vulnerable to robbery and requires a lot of organisation. Then, somewhere in mesopotamia, someone, probably an accountant, comes up with an incredibly elegant solution. They give the soldiers each a bag of metal discs with the king's face on them with which to trade with locals for food and lodgings. Then, it is proclaimed, that on tax day, these coins will be accepted in lieu of an amount of produce or even required as part of tax. Suddenly, everyone in the kingdom has a vested interest in getting hold of some metal disks; if they don't have one by tax day, they'll end up coshed over the head, imprisoned or worse. This system is elegant and lean: @@ 

This theory for the origin of money is known as Chartalism and gives us some interesting insight into the meaning of currency to people. Firstly, we see this origin to money fossilised in the names of certain currencies; the pound is so named @@CHECKTHIS The source of a currency's value is based on what happens to you if you don't have enough of it on tax day; every pound coin gains its value because we go to prison if we don't have enough of them when Her Majesty's Inland Revenue comes knocking in April. Each pound coin is a unit of deffered state violence.

This also tells us what could cause a currency to lose its value. If the government lost the power to tax people then the system would break down. The system would also break down if the nation that has the money wasn't producing enough. Roughly, the number of pound coins in circulation can buy the entire productive power of the UK. The percentage of the money you have of the whole is the amount of other people's labour you can leverage as a percentage of the whole of the British public.

In the modern world, the issuing of currency is not only done by paying for the armed forces. Government spending goes on all sorts of infrastructure projects and causes the government deems worthy. Therefore, paying your taxes every year is proof that you have, somewhere along the supply chain, done your bit to help the government achieve its goals. Thinking about the economy this way rubbishes any political point made using the words *taxpayer money*. It also gives the idea of universal basic income an interesting spin: A UBI at living wage is a government stating that its goal is to ensure all people deserve to be alive and leveraging its coercive might to ensure this is so. If a state's coercive might should be leveraged to achieve anything, this is probably a worthy goal.

Of course, the simple system of goverment spending then taxing people to achieve its goals is not the system we live in the modern world. This clean economic system has a lot of abberations, the largest of which we call capitalism. Lets take a second to look at capitalism through the lens of MMT. Capitalism is often misunderstood as markets and trading but is actually characterised as an economic system where an owner of some land or a factory (a means of production) gets legal right to all things produced from that land or factory. The owner does not have to work, but makes a profit by not paying workers the full money associated with their work.